In front of all stands logic or rational philosophy .
He rather involves it as a vital element in Himself .
It is by this means that they are understood and demonstrated .
The undetermined object of an empirical intuition is called phenomenon .
Consequently , the original representation , time , must be given as unlimited .
In the same way it was asked whether the soul was simple or composite .
The beasts never get so far as this separation , and they feel no shame .
If we stick to causality as such , we have it not in its truth .
Understanding knows nothing in nature but that which is , or has been , or will be .
For example , there is heat in a room , which does not exist in the open air .
It is quite true however that the categories are not contained in the sensation as it is given us .
The true knowledge of God begins when we know that things , as they immediately are , have no truth .
Such associations however are purely external : there is nothing in the mere numbers to make them express these definite thoughts .
Let it be supposed , that there is no other kind of causality than that according to the laws of nature .
For , although all the parts are contained in the intuition of the whole , the whole division is not contained therein .
For how can two persons dispute about a thing , the reality of which neither can present in actual or even in possible experience ?
Cognition from principles , then , is that cognition in which I cognize the particular in the general by means of conceptions .
Synthetical propositions , which relate to things in general , an à priori intuition of which is impossible , are transcendental .
For it therefore even the object , which it pre-supposes , has only hypotheticalideal reality , ssentially no-reality .
Perhaps , after they have wearied more than injured each other , they will discover the nothingness of their cause of quarrel and part good friends .
In these circumstances we must advance from the Categorical to the Hypothetical judgment , which may be expressed in the formula : If A is , B is .
All scientific researches which pursue this tendency exclusively , lay themselves fairly open to the charge of mere jugglery and an over-strained precisianism .
But , again , the limit , as the negation of something , is not an abstract nothing but a nothing which is , hat we call an 'other .
Thus , the schemata of the pure conceptions of the understanding are the true and only conditions whereby our understanding receives an application to objects , and consequently significance .
Quality is , in the first place , the character identical with being : so identical , that a thing ceases to be what it is , if it loses its quality .
The principle of causality , and , by consequence , the mechanism of nature as determined by causality , would then have absolute validity in relation to all things as efficient causes .
This theory which holds things all round to have one and the same matter at bottom , and merely to differ externally in respect of form , is much in vogue with the reflective understanding .
The Ground is the essence in its own inwardness ; the essence is intrinsically a ground ; and it is a ground only when it is a ground of somewhat , of an other .
By a transcendental exposition , I mean the explanation of a conception , as a principle , whence can be discerned the possibility of other synthetical à priori cognitions .
And yet , such are the barren distinctions of words , with which men fancy that they assert an important truth : even while the formulae they maintain are identical with those which they impugn .
The process of cognition has issued in the overthrow of this bias and the restoration of that unity , which as unity , and in its immediacy , is in the first instance the Idea of Life .
Thus we find the metaphysicians engaged in an attempt to elicit by the instrumentality of thought , what was the essence or fundamental attribute of the Soul The Soul , they said , is simple .
But how objects as things in themselves—how the nature of things is subordinated to principles and is to be determined , according to conceptions , is a question which it seems well nigh impossible to answer .
And thus the action-of-thought , has also , negative effect upon its basis : and the matter of sensation , when it receives the stamp of universality , at once loses its first and phenomenal shape .
The question naturally arises : What is the cause which necessitates this twofold exercise of reason , and how are we to discover whether it is the philosophical or the mathematical method which reason is pursuing in an argument ?
This schematism of our understanding in regard to phenomena and their mere form , is an art , hidden in the depths of the human soul , whose true modes of action we shall only with difficulty discover and unveil .
In its course , howeverand this is the remarkable point , it finally stumbles upon what are termed irrational and incommensurable quantities ; and in their case any attempt at further specification drives it beyond the principle of the understanding .
From the former point of view there exists for us a world independent of us , world we can only modify ; whilst the pure egowhich even on this altitude does not altogether disappear from us , is put outside us and called God .
Although , in the course of our analytic , we have already given sufficient answers to these questions , yet a summary recapitulation of these solutions may be useful in strengthening our conviction , by uniting in one point the momenta of the arguments .
It is an important corollary of this theory , that on this empirical mode of treatment legal and ethical principles and laws , as well as the truths of religion , are exhibited as the work of chance , and stripped of their objective character and inner truth .
The old woman who frequents the churcfor whom by the way I cherish all possible respecfinds a sermon very intelligible and very edifying which contains lots of texts and verses of hymns she knows by rote and can repeat .
For me , therefore , the essence of the finite is composed of an immediate vision of the absolutely timeless infinitewith an absolute identity of subjectivity and objectivity , and of a separation of the two latter , and an analysiscontinued ad infinitum of the infinite .
Usually we regard different things as unaffected by each other .
Consequently , it is the unity of consciousness alone that constitutes the possibility of representations relating to an object , and therefore of their objective validity , and of their becoming cognitions , and consequently , the possibility of the existence of the understanding itself .
Essential difference is therefore Opposition ; according to which the different is not confronted by any other but by its other .
The charge will be seen to be unfounded if we remember that his system , instead of denying God , rather recognises that He alone really is .
The notion of God formed the subject of discussion ; and yet the criterion of our knowledge was derived from such an extraneous source as the materialised conception of God .
The categories of modality possess this peculiarity , that they do not in the least determine the object , or enlarge the conception to which they are annexed as predicates , but only express its relation to the faculty of cognition .
The whole , though we can see that it consists of parts , ceases to be a whole when it is divided : whereas force is only shown to be force when it exerts itself , and in its exercise only comes back to itself .
If we consider God as the Essence only , and nothing more , we know Him only as the universal and irresistible Power ; in other words , as the Lord .
On one hand any ground suffices : on the other no ground suffices as mere ground ; because , as already said , it is yet void of a content objectively and intrinsically determined , and is therefore not self-acting and productive .
To reflect is a lesson which even the child has to learn .
Both have , in reality , been struggling for the twofold interest of reason ; the one maintaining the one interest , the other the other .
β The one-and-same of this correlationthe self-relation found in it is thus immediately a negative self-relation .
The cause assumed to be first is on account of its immediacy passive , a dependent being , and an effect .
The result of Dialectic is positive , because it has a definite content , or because its result is not empty and abstract nothing , but the negation of certain specific propositions which are contained in the result , or the very reason that it is a resultant and not an immediate nothing .
The thought did not gain its full recognition till the days of Christianity .
And thus reason is satisfied , and an unconditioned placed at the head of the series of phenomena , without introducing confusion into or discontinuing it , contrary to the principles of the understanding .
A second question in these metaphysical systems was : Is the world finite or infinite ?
Untrue in this sense means the same as bad , or self-discordant .
Unsystematic philosophising can only be expected to give expression to personal peculiarities of mind , and has no principle for the regulation of its contents .
It must take up its abode only in the region of complete certitude , whether this relates to the cognition of objects themselves , or to the limits which bound all our cognition .
In spite of this , the knowledge of God is no mere sequel , dependent on the empirical phase of consciousness : in fact , its independence is essentially secured through this negation and exaltation .
The Freedom of the Will is an expression that often means mere free-choice , or the will in the form of contingency .
In this view , the doubt respecting all dogmatical philosophy , which proceeds without the guidance of criticism , is well grounded ; but we cannot therefore deny to reason the ability to construct a sound philosophy , when the way has been prepared by a thorough critical investigation .
Accordingly , there are three rules of all relations of time in phenomena , according to which the existence of every phenomenon is determined in respect of the unity of all time , and these antecede all experience and render it possible .
By means of analysis different representations are brought under one conception—an operation of which general logic treats .
To be that , it is necessary that , in the same time in which the preceding state existed , its opposite could have existed in its place ; but such a cognition is not given us in the mere phenomenon of change .
Besides , there is this also to be said .
It might also be alleged that subjective idealism tended to promote self-conceit .
Thus , when I say that certain events occurred in past time , I merely assert the possibility of prolonging the chain of experience , from the present perception , upwards to the conditions that determine it according to time .
To make it complete , he who conducts himself in a manner not unworthy of happiness , must be able to hope for the possession of happiness .
For such an object could not be represented either in space or in time ; and without these conditions intuition or representation is impossible .
This unity of the universal and the particular is the notion : and it is the notion which , as we now see , forms the content of the judgment .
The idea is present , in actual shape , not something , as it were , over the hill and far away .
The proper ground of this fact is that all change to be perceived as change presupposes something permanent in intuition , while in the internal sense no permanent intuition is to be found .
Reason thus prepares the sphere of the understanding for the operations of this faculty : 1 .
Yet , on further examination even this relation will appear finite , and finite in virtue of this mediation : just as , conversely , the relation of whole and parts is obviously finite in virtue of its immediacy .
It is the very essence of force to manifest itself , and thus in the totality of manifestation , conceived as a law , we at the same time discover the force itself .
The qualitative character , which in the One or unit has reached the extreme point of its characterisation , has thus passed over into determinatenessquality suppressed , i .
This congeries , afforded by sensation and perception , must however be reduced to an identity or primary synthesis .
Now , that in the sphere of human cognition we have judgements which are necessary , and in the strictest sense universal , consequently pure à priori , it will be an easy matter to show .
And what is a Syllogism but an explicit putting , i .
Thus even in these outside things man is dealing with himself .
Finally , as regards the third postulate , it applies to material necessity in existence , and not to merely formal and logical necessity in the connection of conceptions .
But besides intuition there is no other mode of cognition , except through conceptions ; consequently , the cognition of every , at least of every human , understanding is a cognition through conceptions—not intuitive , but discursive .
But the third no less demands an intrinsically determinate Universality , or an individuality as type of the genus , after the round of the forms of external connexion between individuality and universality has been run through in the figures of the Reflective Syllogism .
He stopped half-way however , when he attached to Appearance a subjective meaning only , and put the abstract essence immovable outside it as the thing-in-itself beyond the reach of our cognition .
But as respects the Idea also , he never got beyond its negative aspect , as what ought to be but is not .
The assertion of an empirical origin would attribute to them a sort of generatio aequivoca .
The first object of an idea of this kind is the ego , considered merely as a thinking nature or soul .
This form , namely feeling , may possibly seize and appropriate the full organic truth : but the form has no real congruity with its contents .
Hence they are the absolute impulse towards integration by and in one another .
Consequently , no substance ; consequently , nothing would exist .
Even in ordinary consciousness that identity may be found .
The essential point to keep in mind about the opposition of Form and Content is that the content is not formless , but has the form in its own self , quite as much as the form is external to it .
This new actuality thus issuing is the very inside of the immediate actuality which it uses up .
But there is Eudaemonism and Eudaemonism ; as Cf .
Our inference of the simple from the composite is valid only of self-subsisting things .
A thought limited to these modes has no sense of the Infinite and the True , and cannot bridge over the gulf that separates it from them .
We now , in the second place , consider this action in its bearings upon objects , or as reflection upon something .
The reader will remark that the proof presented above is very different from the dogmatical demonstration given in the antithesis of the first antinomy .
In the elaboration of our experience , they may also be employed with great advantage , as heuristic70 principles .
A complete insight into and comprehension of them would render Theology , Ethics , and , through the conjunction of both , Religion , solely dependent on the speculative faculty of reason .
It is evident that in all these transitions there is a further purpose than merely to show the indissoluble connexion between the notion or thought and being .
On the side of one of its factors , namely reflection-on-other-things , it has in it the differences , in virtue of which it is a characterised and concrete thing .
If these propositions have for their predicate such terms as substance of the world , its necessary essence , cause which regulates and directs it according to design , they are certainly inadequate to express what is or ought to be understood by God .
I shall merely premise an explanation of what the categories are .
The principles resulting from this highest principle of pure reason will , however , be transcendent in relation to phenomena , that is to say , it will be impossible to make any adequate empirical use of this principle .
When we arrange these principles of systematic unity in the order conformable to their employment in experience , they will stand thus : Variety , Affinity , Unity , each of them , as ideas , being taken in the highest degree of their completeness .
The first will treat of the sensuous condition under which alone pure conceptions of the understanding can be employed—that is , of the schematism of the pure understanding .
The word absolute is at present frequently used to denote that something can be predicated of a thing considered in itself and intrinsically .
Hence any content , however absurd and nonsensical , can be viewed as possible .
It follows that this cannot be the only kind of causality .
The absolute Completeness of the DIVISION of given totality in a phenomenon .
General logic abstracts all content of the predicatethough it be negative , and only considers whether the said predicate be affirmed or denied of the subject .
Reflection of this kind has been often maintained to be the condition , or even the only way , of attaining a consciousness and certitude of the Eternal and True .
Nay , even our own existence , which would in this case depend upon the self-existent reality of such a mere nonentity as time , would necessarily be changed with it into mere appearance—an absurdity which no one has as yet been guilty of .
Motion of an object in space does not belong to a pure science , consequently not to geometry ; because , that a thing is movable cannot be known à priori , but only from experience .
Each of the three spheres of the logical idea proves to be a systematic whole of thought-terms , and a phase of the Absolute .
The third is Individualitmeaning the reflection-into-self of the specific characters of universality and particularity ; hich negative self-unity has complete and original determinateness , without any loss to its self-identity or universality .
And this is actually the case with all cosmological conceptions , which , for the reason above mentioned , involve reason , so long as it remains attached to them , in an unavoidable antinomy .
For it is a thought of which such conception is the vehicle , and there is no want of the form of universality , without which no content could be in me , or be a conception at all .
It declares , in the name of these ideas , certain actions to be necessary which nevertheless have not taken place and which perhaps never will take place ; and yet presupposes that it possesses the faculty of causality in relation to these actions .
In all judgements I am the determining subject of that relation which constitutes a judgement .
For the same reason , especially as the materials to be combined also depend upon no one rule or principle , the arrangement is at best an experiment , and will always exhibit inequalities .
Now it is this unity that is not found in the sensation .
At a later period however he changed and fixed the nomenclature of his distinction .
Now we can cogitate all the powers and faculties of the soul—even that of consciousness—as diminished by one half , the substance still remaining .
In its return into itself , and its developed abiding by itself : the notion in and for itself .
But , in this interest of thought , the severity of criticism has rendered to reason a not unimportant service , by the demonstration of the impossibility of making any dogmatical affirmation concerning an object of experience beyond the boundaries of experience .
And this necessary and self-determined being , different from the being at the commencement , is God .
The aim of knowledge is to divest the objective world that stands opposed to us of its strangeness , and , as the phrase is , to find ourselves at home in it : which means no more than to trace the objective world back to the notion , o our innermost self .
The grounds are themselves existences : and the existents in like manner are in many directions grounds as well as consequents .
But I am conscious , through internal experience , of my existence in timeconsequently , also , of the determinability of the former in the latter , and that is more than the simple consciousness of my representation .
No doubt the conception of right , as employed by a sound understanding , contains all that the most subtle investigation could unfold from it , although , in the ordinary practical use of the word , we are not conscious of the manifold representations comprised in the conception .
The third unites both the former , by enouncing the fact of homogeneity as existing even in the most various diversity , by means of the gradual transition from one species to another .
Such a conception of the relation between subject and predicate however is at once contradicted by the copula 'is .
In arithmetic the several kinds of operation are usually presented as accidental modes of dealing with numbers .
The simple is never presented in experience ; and , if by substance is here meant the permanent object of sensuous intuition , the possibility of a simple phenomenon is perfectly inconceivable .
Kant's examination of the categories suffers from the grave defect of viewing them , not absolutely and for their own sake , but in order to see whether they are subjective or objective .
A bad state or a sickly body may exist all the same ; but these things are untrue , because their notion and their reality are out of harmony .
As , therefore , the antithesis will not concede the existence of a first beginning which might be available as a foundation , a complete edifice of cognition , in the presence of such hypothesis , is utterly impossible .
Now in any case to think things over is at least to transform feelings , ordinary ideas , and so forth into thoughts .
And on the other hand actuality is not so bad and irrational , as purblind or wrong-headed and muddle-brained would-be reformers imagine .
This conflict of the propositional form with the unity of comprehension which destroys it is like the antagonism in rhythm between metre and accent .
It is one and the same universal which is in these terms of the Disjunctive syllogism ; they are only different forms for expressing it .
I answer that this question is utterly without meaning .
The subsumption of the condition of another possible judgement under the condition of the rule is the minor .
So long as the object of our rational conceptions is the totality of conditions in the world of phenomena , and the satisfaction , from this source , of the requirements of reason , so long are our ideas transcendental and cosmological .
Such is the constitution of the ideal of reason , which is always based upon determinate conceptions , and serves as a rule and a model for limitation or of criticism .
But this fallacy is not a consciously devised one , but a perfectly natural illusion of the common reason of man .
But it is not explicitly brought out before the Relations of Substance and Causality .
The latter however are the motives which must be viewed by the pragmatist as really efficient , otherwise the assumption of a contrast between the inwardthe disposition of the agent and the outwardthe import of the action would fall to the ground .
But apart from this relation , à priori synthetical propositions are absolutely impossible , because they have no third term , that is , no pure object , in which the synthetical unity can exhibit the objective reality of its conceptions .
Such a regress is , therefore , the regressus in indefinitum , which , as not determining a quantity in the object , is clearly distinguishable from the regressus in infinitum .
A definition in this case would evidently be nothing more than a determination of the word .
Thus Spinoza , in particular , begins with definitions .
And in finite things at least this disregard of matter for any determinate form is certainly exhibited .
I divide all apodeictic propositions , whether demonstrable or immediately certain , into dogmata and mathemata .
But the animal never gets so far in its Kind as to have a being of its own ; it succumbs to the power of Kind .
For the conjunction of the first and second , in order to produce the third conception , requires a particular function of the understanding , which is by no means identical with those which are exercised in the first and second .
The aim of the transcendental ideal formed by the mind is either to discover a conception which shall harmonize with the idea of absolute necessity , or a conception which shall contain that idea .
These two conceptions lie at the foundation of all other reflection , so inseparably are they connected with every mode of exercising the understanding .
In the explanation of given phenomena , no other things and no other grounds of explanation can be employed than those which stand in connection with the given phenomena according to the known laws of experience .
We now go closer into the speciality of subject and predicate .
For such a hypothesis would introduce the principle of ignava ratio , which requires us to give up the search for causes that might be discovered in the course of experience and to rest satisfied with a mere idea .
The same thing holds good also of single works of art .
It is universally agreed that thought is the object of Logic .
Certainly a reason-derived knowledge of God is the highest problem of philosophy .
The minor contains an experience , the major reasons from a general experience to the existence of a necessary being .
Reality , in the pure conception of the understanding , is that which corresponds to a sensation in general ; that , consequently , the conception of which indicates a beingin time .
For it was these very laws , the internal practical necessity of which led us to the hypothesis of an independent cause , or of a wise ruler of the universe , who should give them effect .
Because it has no existence for starting-point and point d'appui , the Idea is frequently treated as a mere logical form .
This doctrine is illustrated in the case of understanding , the first form of logical truths .
It modifies and informs that world by the inward nature of the subjective , which is here taken to be the genuine objective .
Individual and actual are the same thing : only the former has issued from the notion , and is thus , as a universal , stated expressly as a negative identity with itself .
In this process too the other syllogisms are equally involved .
Such is the aspect under which actuality first comes before consciousness , and which is often mistaken for actuality itself .
One person connects the notion conveyed in a word with one thing , another with another thing ; and the unity of consciousness in that which is empirical , is , in relation to that which is given by experience , not necessarily and universally valid .
They are conceptions of pure reason , for they regard all empirical cognition as determined by means of an absolute totality of conditions .
The apodeictical proposition cogitates the assertorical as determined by these very laws of the understanding , consequently as affirming à priori , and in this manner it expresses logical necessity .
Popular opinion makes the difference to be as follows .
The possibility of things must therefore be regarded as derived—except that of the thing which contains in itself all reality , which must be considered to be primitive and original .
The following is , therefore , the natural course of human reason .
As my present aim is not to set forth a complete system , but merely the principles of one , I reserve this task for another time .
The stereotyped opposition between the form of immediacy and that of mediation gives to the former a halfness and inadequacy , that affects every content which is brought under it .
So far as regards the content of this subjective idealism , not a word need be wasted .
To things as things in themselves , conformability to law must necessarily belong independently of an understanding to cognize them .
And where , indeed , should we look for objects to correspond to our conceptions , if not in experience , by which alone objects are presented to us ?
Thus every syllogism is a form of the deduction of a cognition from a principle .
In the science of transcendental æsthetic accordingly , we shall first isolate sensibility or the sensuous faculty , by separating from it all that is annexed to its perceptions by the conceptions of understanding , so that nothing be left but empirical intuition .
For this dependency is in like manner directly suspended , and is rather the reflection of the cause in itself , its primariness : in short , it is in the effect that the cause first becomes actual and a cause .
For it is the essential one-sidedness of the category , which makes whatever comes under it one sided and , for that reason , finite .
Thus electricity and chemical affinity are regarded as the same , and even the organic processes of digestion and assimilation are looked upon as a mere chemical operation .
To the categories of quantity , that is , the conceptions of all , many , and one , the conception which annihilates all , that is , the conception of none , is opposed .
This free and infinite form will hereafter come before us as the notion .
But this cannot be obtained otherwise than by a complete division of parts , whereby the real in matter becomes either nothing or that which is not matter , that is to say , the simple .
But this is only the second step in our inquiry .
On the contrary it exhibits that point as derivative and called into being , and then God is seen to be primary , truly immediate and self-subsisting , with the means of derivation wrapt up and absorbed in himself .