He dropped it so straight that the gingerbread man fell right into Bobby's uplifted pinafore .
Being very thirsty , the Princess dismounted , and knelt by the flowing water .
When the sentence was fulfilled , the young Prince married his true bride , and they lived together in peace and happiness .
Then Little Red Riding Hood's father carried her home and they lived happily ever after .
Towser was naturally taken by surprise , but he turned his head around and promptly bit off the end of the monkey's tail , and Jocko quickly jumped off again , chattering his indignation .
The little birds heard them and began to trill sweet lullabies , which presently lulled them to rest .
There was great rejoicing when they arrived at the castle .
Snowdrop opened the door and bought the pretty lace .
When the hour of departure came they bade each other a sorrowful farewell and set out for the bridegroom's country .
Everybody was happy that Little Red Riding Hood had escaped the wolf .
The Prince hurried towards them , and lifted the Waiting-woman from her horse , thinking she was his bride .
Just at that moment Little Red Riding Hood's father was passing the cottage and heard her scream .
Everybody loved this little girl , her grandmother perhaps loved her most of all and gave her a great many pretty things .
The old Queen packed up everything suitable to a royal outfit .
Upon the Queen's return home she found by asking her mirror that Snowdrop still lived , so she disguised herself a third time and came to the dwarfs' little house and gave Snowdrop a poisoned apple .
The old King looked out of the window and saw the delicate , pretty little creature standing in the courtyard ; so he asked the bride about her companion .
The Prince was charmed with her beauty and a great banquet was prepared .
Snowdrop placed herself before the old woman , who laced her so quickly and so tightly that she took away Snowdrop's breath and she fell down as though dead .
Once upon a time there lived two little children whose parents were ill unto death .
He scampered down the walk , with his little bare feet pattering against the warm gravel , climbed over the wall , and in a few seconds arrived under the tree , just as Jocko was holding up the poor little gingerbread man .
She had had enough of hunting gingerbread men , and she crept back to the kitchen to repair damages .
The poor little Princess was obliged to give way .
The gingerbread man crawled out to the furthermost end of the branch , and hung by one hand , but the monkey swung himself under the branch , and stretching out his long arm , he pulled the gingerbread man in .
And so the wedding was celebrated the same day with great pomp and ceremony .
Two other lumps were stuck on beneath for the legs , and were pulled out into proper shape , with feet and toes all complete , and two still smaller pieces were made into arms , with dear little hands and fingers .
Meanwhile , the gingerbread man had climbed up on the garden wall , and stood on the top with his hands in his pockets , looking at the scrimmage , and laughing till the tears ran down from his little caraway-seed eyes and his raisin mouth was bubbling all over with fun .
Snowdrop received such a violent jerk that the poisonous apple was jerked right out of her throat and she sat up alive and well again .
When the seven dwarfs came home they found their poor Snowdrop on the floor , and suspecting the bad Queen began to look for the cause , soon finding the comb .
The birdies knew that the children would die of cold and hunger , so they covered them with leaves of crimson and brown and green .
Then the gingerbread man was finished ready for baking , and a very jolly little man he was .
At the further end of the wood was another pretty cottage and in it lived her grandmother .
This frightened the children so much that they ran away and did not see the robbers again .
The wolf pressed the latch , and walked in where the grandmother lay in bed .
But , unfortunately , they left out one rather cross old fairy , and she was so angry that she said the princess should die when she reached the age of sixteen , by pricking her hand with a spindle .
All around her grew pretty wild flowers which she loved so well and she stopped to pick a bunch for her grandmother .
She journeyed to the dwarfs' home and induced Snowdrop to let her comb her hair .
Mouser turned in a hurry and ran after , although she was still rather too sleepy to know what it was she was trying to catch , and after the cat came the cook , lumbering along rather heavily , but also making pretty good speed .
At the end of the hundred years a king's son heard of the castle and the enchanted princess who lay asleep there and determined to rescue her .
Not long after the seven dwarfs came home they found that she was laced too tight and cut the lace , whereupon Snowdrop began to breathe and soon came back to life again .
When the gingerbread man saw the dog coming , he jumped down on the farther side of the wall , and began running across the field .
No sooner had they removed it than Snowdrop came to life again .
As the princess was as much taken with the prince's appearance as he was with hers , they decided to be married .
At last he reached the porch covered with flowers and knocked at the door of the cottage .
The cook picked herself up , and although her face was also badly scratched and her dress was torn , she was determined to see the end of the chase , and she followed after the dog , though this time more slowly .
The dwarfs were so sorry for him they consented , and the prince's servants were about to carry the coffin away when they stumbled and fell over the root of a tree .
All the other fairies present , except one , had already given the princess their beautiful gifts , and this last one said she could not prevent part of the wicked wish coming true ; but her gift should be that the princess should not really die , but only fall into a deep sleep , which should last for a hundred years , and at the end of that time she should be awakened by a king's son .
The minute she put the poisoned comb in her hair Snowdrop fell down as though dead .
Thereupon he went away unnoticed ; and in the evening , when the Goose-girl came home , he asked her why she did all these things .
Instantly she pricked her hand and fell into a deep sleep , as did everyone else in the palace .
There was once an old Queen who had a very beautiful daughter .
When the princess was sixteen years old she saw an old woman spinning and took the spindle from her to try this strange new work .
Then he held him up and looked at him so hungrily that the little raisin mouth began to pucker down at the corners , and the caraway-seed eyes filled with tears .
And the square cakes were all done , nice and hard and brown , and the round cakes were all done , nice and hard and brown , and the gingerbread man was all done too , nice and hard and brown ; and he was standing up in his corner , with his little caraway-seed eyes sparkling , and his raisin mouth bubbling over with mischief , while he waited for the oven door to be opened .
She used to make their seven little beds , and prepare the meals for the seven little men , and they were all quite happy until the Queen found out from her mirror that Snowdrop was alive still , for , as it always told the truth , it still told her Snowdrop was the fairest lady in the land .
Then the wolf put on the cap which she had dropped and crept under the bedclothes .
But just as the dog jumped up , the little gingerbread man , who had been watching for the chance , quietly slipped between his legs , and climbed up on the top of the stone wall , so that Towser saw nothing but the cat running towards him down the walk , and behind the cat the cook , now quite out of breath .
The bridegroom sat at the head of the table , with the Princess on one side and the Waiting-woman at the other ; but she did not recognize the Princess .
Once upon a time there was a little princess called Snowdrop , who had a cruel step-mother who was jealous of her .
She was led upstairs , but the real Princess had to stay below .
When the Queen got home and found by asking her mirror that Snowdrop was still alive , she planned to make an end of her for good , so she made a poisoned comb and disguised herself to look like a different old woman .
Then Bobby held him up and looked at him , and the little raisin mouth puckered down lower than ever , and the tears ran right out of the caraway-seed eyes .
They then told the angels in Heaven the sad story of the lost babes , and one of the white-robed angels flew down to earth and carried both the little ones back to Heaven , so that when they awoke they were no longer tired and hungry , but were again with their dear mother .
Of courseshe married the prince , and she , her husband and the good little dwarfs lived happily ever after , but the cruel step-mother came to a bad end , and no one was even sorry for her .
There was once a sweet little maid who lived with her father and mother in a pretty little cottage at the edge of the village .
But the nicest work was done on the head , for the top was frizzed up into a pretty sugary hat ; on either side was made a dear little ear , and in front , after the nose had been carefully moulded , a beautiful mouth was made out of a big raisin , and two bright little eyes with burnt almonds and caraway seeds .
As he came down , he could see through the window in the field beyond the garden the cook , and the dog , and the monkey , and could even hear the barking of Towser and the chattering of Jocko .
The dog , who was very cross because his face had been badly scratched , let go of the cook , and at last , catching sight of the gingerbread man , made a bolt for the garden wall .
Red Riding Hood was so happy that at first she wanted to dance through the wood .
But Bobby was too hungry to mind gingerbread tears , and he gave one big bite , and swallowed down both legs and a piece of the body .
He sent for two robbers and bargained with them to take the two babes into the woods and kill them .
Finally she forced her to swear that she would not tell a person at the Court what had taken place .
The boy was called little Conrad , and the real bride was sent with him to look after the geese .
She took some flour and water , and treacle and ginger , and mixed them all well together , and she put in some more water to make it thin , and then some more flour to make it thick , and a little salt and some spice , and then she rolled it out into a beautiful , smooth , dark-yellow dough .
Now , if there was anything that Towser liked , it was going after the cat , and he jumped up the walk so fiercely that the poor cat did not have time to stop herself or to get out of his way , and they came together with a great fizzing , and barking , and meowing , and howling , and scratching , and biting , as if a couple of Catherine-wheels had gone off in the wrong way and had got mixed up with one another .
Once upon a time there was a king and queen who for a very long time had no children , and when at length a little daughter was born to them they were so pleased that they gave a christening feast to which they invited a number of fairies .
Once she gave her a red cloak with a hood which she always wore , so people called her Little Red Riding Hood .
Give the girl something to do to keep her from idling .
The Queen had a magic mirror , which could speak to her , and when she looked into it and asked who was the fairest lady in the land the mirror told her she was , for she was very beautiful ; but as Snowdrop grew up she became still more lovely than her step-mother and the mirror did not fail to tell the Queen this .
The uncle promised he would be a father to them , but he soon began to scheme to possess the money the parents had left in his care for the children .
Snowdrop wandered about until she came to the house of seven little dwarfs , and they were so kind as to take her in and let her live with them .
The old cook turned round as fast as she could , which wasn't very fast , for she was rather a heavy woman and she had been quite taken by surprise , and she saw lying right across the door-way , fast asleep in the sun , old Mouser , the cat .
So he cut his way through the thick prickly hedge and at length he came to the princess .
They begged their brother to care for the two little ones as he would his own .
After a little while , the cat managed to pull herself out from under the cook and the dog , and a very cast-down and crumpled-up-looking cat she was .
Then a strong wind sprang up , which blew away Conrad's hat right over the fields , and he had to run after it .
When they reached the meadow , the Princess sat down on the grass and let down her hair , and when Conrad saw it he was so delighted that he wanted to pluck some out ; but she said— .
When he saw how lovely and how sweet she looked he fell in love with her and , stooping , kissed her lips .
He went to the little Pig's house , and told him how frightened he had been by a great round thing which came down the hill past him .
When they had eaten , the King put a riddle to the Waiting-woman .
But he jumped so fast and so far that he went right over the gingerbread man , and as luck would have it , he came down on the back of Towser , the dog , who had just scrambled over the wall , and whom he had not before noticed .
They made a fine glass coffin , and put Snowdrop into it and were carrying her away to bury her when they met a prince , who fell in love with the little dead maiden , and begged the dwarfs to give her to him .
Then the Waiting-woman , in a harsh voice , ordered her to take off her royal robes , and to put on her own mean garments .
He thought at once that the cat must have stolen something , and that it was the cat the cook wanted him to stop .
At once she awoke and with her the king and queen and all the courtiers , who had fallen asleep at the same time .
They wandered on and on until they became so tired and hungry that at length they sat down at the foot of a tree and cried as if their hearts would break .
Now at the bottom of the walk , lying fast asleep in the sun against the warm stones of the garden wall , was Towser , the dog .
The King ordered Conrad to go next day as usual and he followed into the field and hid behind a bush .
In fact , he looked so sly that the cook was afraid he was plotting some mischief , and when the batter was ready for the oven , she put in the square cakes and she put in the round cakes ; and then she put in the little gingerbread man in a far back corner , where he couldn't get away in a hurry .
And the cat scratched whichever came nearest , whether it was a piece of the dog or of the cook , and the dog bit at whatever came nearest , whether it was a piece of the cat or of the cook , so that the poor cook was badly pummelled on both sides .
And the little Pig put on the cover again in an instant , boiled him up , and ate him for supper , and lived happy ever after .